
# Space Complexity of Algorithms

Whenever a solution to a problem is written sime memory is required to complete. For any algorithm, memory may be used for the following:

1. Variables (This include the constant values, temporary values)
2. Program Instruction
3. Execution

**Space complexity** is the amount of memory used by the algorithm (including the input values to the algorithm) to execute and produce the result.

Sometimes **Auxiliary Space** is confused with Space Complexity. But Auxiliary Space is the extra space or the temporary space used by the algorithm during it's execution.

**Space Complexity = Auxiliary Space + Input Space**

## Memory Usage While Execution

While executin, an algorithm uses memory space for three reasons:

1. **Instruction Sapce**
  It's the amount of memory used to save the compiled version of instructions.
  
2. **Envrionmental Stack**
  Sometimes an algorithm(function) may be called inside another algorithm(function). In such a situation, the current variables are pushed onto the system stack, where they wait for further execution and then the call to the inside algorithm(function) is made. 
  
For example, if a function A() calls function B() inside it, then all the variables of the function A() will get stored on the system stack temporarily, while the function B() is called and executed inside funtion A().

3. **Data Space**
  Amount of space used by the variables and constants. 
  
  
But while calculating the **Space Complexity** of any algorithm, we usually consider only the **Data Space** and we neglect the **Instruction Space** and **Environmental Stack**.


## Calculating the Space Complexity

For calculating the space complexity, we need to know the value of memory used by different types of datatype variables, which generally varies for different operating systems, but the method for calculating the space complexity remaind the same.

| Type                                                   | Size    |
|--------------------------------------------------------|---------|
| bool, char, unsigned char, signed char, __int8         | 1 byte  |
| __int16, short, unsigned short, wchar_t, __wchar_t     | 2 bytes |
| float, __int32, int, unsigned int, long, unsigned long | 4 bytes |
| double, __int64, long double, long long                | 8 bytes |

Now let's learn how to compute space complexity by taking a few examples:
```
  int z = a + b + c;
  return(z);
```
In the above expression a, b, c and z are all integer types, hence they will take up 4 bytes each, so total memory requirement will be (4(4) + 4) = 20 bytes, this additional 4 bytes is for **return value**. And because this space requirement is fixed for the above example, hence it is called **Constant Space Complexity**.

Let's have another example, this time a bit more complex,
```
int sum(int a[], int n)
{
  int x = 0;
  for(int i = 0; i < n; i++)
  {
    x = x + a[i];
  }
  return(x);
}
```
- In the above code, (4xn) bytes of space is required for the array a[] elements.
- 4 bytes each for x, n, u and return value.

Hence the total memory requirement will be (4n + 12), which is increasing linearity with the increase in the input value n, hence it is called **Linear Space Complexity**.

Similarity, we can have quadratic and other complex space complexity as well, as the complexity of an algorithm increases.

But we should always focus on writing algorithm code in such a way that we keep the space complexity **minimum**.




